UDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: While
the candidates
are in Florida battling for
Sunshine State
votes, a look at how rising
premiums under
the Affordable Care Act could
play into the
election.
Then: the international stakes
of the United
States' election -- what the
rest of the world
is thinking during one of the
nation's most
contentious presidential races.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The coming U.S.
election
has created a level of
apprehension not experienced
for decades.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
first-generation college
students take on more than just
tests and
all-nighters -- the bigger
obstacles these
students face.
YUKI BURTON, Educational
Opportunities Program:
I have students who are living
day by day,
again, in that surviving model
and thinking
about, how do I meet tomorrow's
need and tomorrow's,
and not thinking about my
long-term wellness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. director
of national
intelligence voiced doubt today
that North
Korea will ever give up nuclear
weapons.
In a Washington speed, James
Clapper said
-- quote -- "The notion of
getting the North
Koreans to denuclearize is
probably a lost
cause.
They are not going to do that."
The State Department quickly
disputed his
statement and insisted U.S.
policy is both
unchanged and realistic.
JOHN KIRBY, U.S. Assistant
Secretary of State:
Our policy is to seek, to obtain
a verifiable,
verifiable denuclearization of
the Korean
Peninsula.
That is the policy.
That is both the goal and what
we want to
see, and there's a way to do
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
has repeatedly
said the U.S. will never accept
a nuclear-armed
North Korea.
But the communist state has
stepped up its
nuclear and ballistic missiles
tests in recent
months.
Militants in Pakistan stormed a
police academy
overnight, killing at least 61
people.
It happened in the southwestern
city of Quetta.
Most of the dead were police
cadets and recruits.
More than 120 others were
wounded in one of
the deadliest attacks on
Pakistan's security
forces in recent years.
Cadets told of being hunted
down.
ABDUL SATTAR, Police Cadet
(through translator):
Last night, we were getting
ready to sleep
when suddenly we heard sounds of
gunfire,
and the firing continued, volley
after volley,
two or three times.
Then they entered the building
and hurled
grenades and kept firing.
They looked under the beds,
shone torches
and fired on people under the
beds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Islamic State
group claimed
responsibility, but so did a
breakaway faction
of the Pakistani Taliban.
The death rate for migrants
crossing the Mediterranean
has soared this year to three
times last year's
rate.
The U.N. Refugee Agency blames
smugglers using
flimsy inflatable rafts.
It says the numbers trying to
reach Europe
have fallen dramatically.
But despite that, the number of
deaths is
on track to top last year's
total.
WILLIAM SPINDLER, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees: At least 3,740
lives are reported
lost, and we might see this
figure rise in
the next few days.
And that is just short of the
3,771 deaths
reported for the whole of 2015.
This is by far the worst we ever
have seen
in the Mediterranean.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, in
Northern France,
workers today began dismantling
a makeshift
camp in Calais known as the
Jungle.
Some 6,300 migrants there are
being relocated
across France.
Back in this country, the
Pentagon ran into
new criticism over demands that
California
National Guard troops return
their enlistment
bonuses.
Audits have found nearly 10,000
Iraq and Afghanistan
war veterans were overpaid in an
effort to
fill the ranks.
Today, House Speaker Paul Ryan
insisted the
National Guard suspend efforts
to collect
the bonuses until Congress can
act.
A federal judge in San Francisco
has approved
a record settlement in
Volkswagen's emissions
cheating scandal.
It's worth nearly $15 billion.
Under the terms, the company
agrees to buy
back 475,000 V.W.s and Audis or
pay for repairs.
So far, well over 330,000 owners
have registered
for the deal.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 53 points to close
at 18169.
The Nasdaq fell 26 and the S&P
500 slipped
eight.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
bracing for
a double-digit hike in health
care premiums;
what people in other countries
think of the
U.S. election; a water fight
between Iowa's
farmers and city-dwellers; and
much more.
Two weeks and counting.
With 14 days to go, the
presidential battleground
is narrowing, and one state is
emerging as
critical to the result.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: Today, the race for
the White House
seemed like a contest to be
president of Florida.
Donald Trump was spending his
third day in
that state, which he says is
make-or-break.
QUESTION: That is a must-win for
you.
Correct?
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I believe Florida is a must-win,
and I think
we are winning it.
I think we are winning it big.
JOHN YANG: Public polls show
that Trump and
Hillary Clinton are in a close
race in the
state, which explains why they
were just an
hour's drive apart.
Clinton was making her case that
Trump is
unfit to be president.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
The first thing a president does
is to take
an oath to preserve, protect and
defend the
Constitution.
And I have serious doubts
whether about Donald
Trump even understands what that
means.
In America, we don't say we're
going to keep
you in suspense about whether we
will respect
the outcome of an election.
JOHN YANG: Trump seized on the
insurance premium
spike in President Obama's
health care program.
DONALD TRUMP: Obamacare is just
blowing up.
We're going to repeal and
replace Obamacare,
and I can say all of my
employees are having
a tremendous problem with
Obamacare.
JOHN YANG: Later, the manager of
that Trump
club said that most of the
workers have company-provided
insurance, not Obamacare.
Clinton's campaign spokeswoman
rejected Trump's
call to repeal the health care
law.
As Trump questions the integrity
of the election,
the Justice Department said it
be monitoring
polling places around the
country on Election
Day.
But their oversight will be
curtailed this
year because of the 2013 Supreme
Court decision
striking down key provisions of
the Voting
Rights Act.
Meanwhile, Clinton scored
another major endorsement
today from a Cabinet secretary
in a Republican
administration.
Former Secretary of State Colin
Powell said
he will be voting for her.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And late today,
The Washington
Post reported that the Trump
campaign has
ended its joint fund-raising
with the Republican
Party.
That could hurt the party's
get-out-the-vote
efforts.
And as we just heard, the state
and fate of
the health insurance law, or
Obamacare, is
front and center today.
That's because, as the new
enrollment season
for coverage is about to begin,
the administration
announced that premiums will
rise by 25 percent
on average for a benchmark
mid-level plan
through the federally run
market.
At the same time, choices are
decreasing.
One in five consumers will have
a single insurer
to choose from.
It's not a simple picture.
Federal subsidies for most
people getting
coverage this way will increase.
To help us understand more about
it, and how
this all plays into the
campaign, I'm joined
by two following this closely.
Mary Agnes Carey covers the
marketplace for
Kaiser Health News, and Reid
Wilson covering
the politics of it for The Hill
newspaper.
We welcome you both.
So, Mary Agnes, to you first.
How many people are affected by
this?
What percent of the population
overall?
MARY AGNES CAREY, Kaiser Health
News: Of all
the people who buy health
insurance, 5 percent
buy on the ACA exchanges.
Most of us get our coverage
either through
work or through the Medicaid
program or the
Medicare program.
So it's about 20 million people
on the individual
market.
About two-thirds of those get
marketplace
plans.
It's important to them, of
course, but you
have to look at it in
perspective with the
overall numbers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And these are
people who live
across the country?
MARY AGNES CAREY: Across the
country, all
50 states.
The federal government sells --
of the health
insurance exchange, there are
plans are in
about 38 states, and rest and
the District
of Columbia are state-run plans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the range of
-- the percentage
of increase differs from state
to state?
MARY AGNES CAREY: All over the
place.
For example, in Arizona, you had
116 percent
increase in premiums, monthly
premiums, $196
to $422.
And we should say these are
before the subsidies
kick in.
And these are premiums for a
27-year-old male.
So we have to look at it from
that perspective.
Nebraska, we're talking about a
51 percent
increase.
Ohio, a 2 percent increase.
Massachusetts, actually a 3
percent decrease.
So it's really depending on
where you live.
If you live in an urban area or
a rural area,
that's also going to affect the
number of
providers and the networks and
that sort of
thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Reid, as we
see, this is
already having an effect on the
presidential
campaign.
We heard Donald Trump a few
minutes ago saying
this is the end of Obamacare.
REID WILSON, The Hill: And it's
played a role
in Republican campaigns who are
running for
Senate and House seats around
the country.
In New Hampshire, Senator Kelly
Ayotte is
already up with an ad attacking
Governor Maggie
Hassan, one of the most watched
Senate races
in the country, over Governor
Hassan's support
for the Affordable Care Act.
What's notable, though, is that
the amount
of advertising specifically
around the Affordable
Care Act is actually down
significantly from
earlier years.
It's almost as if public opinion
on this matter
has been baked in for the last
five years
-- or six years really since
it's been debated.
And there aren't that many
people who are
willing to change their minds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just because
I know it's
complicated, Mary Agnes, but why
has this
happened?
MARY AGNES CAREY: Well, it's
happened for
a variety of reasons.
Insurers may have gotten in
early and underpriced
their products to try to get
more market share.
And now they are going to have
to even that
out.
We may have had -- likely have
had a lot of
sicker people get in first.
Everyone sort of knew that when
they did the
Affordable Care Act.
The sickest people come first.
They are the most expensive
people.
You also have an ability of some
plans manage
costs better than other plans.
And so now we're going to hear
more about
these things called narrow
networks and other
tightening of costs.
And also some federal programs
to help insurers
balance out the cost of these
really sick
people, two of them are going
away next year,
and the other hasn't necessarily
worked as
intended, so it's sort of a
combined effect.
And different factors have a
different effect
depending on where you live.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So we talked to
several people
around the country affected by
these rate
increases.
Let's begin with a woman named
Beth Plein.
She lives in Maryland.
BETH PLEIN, Maryland: My name is
Beth Plein.
I'm 64.
And I live in Cockeysville,
Maryland.
I am one of the small number of
people who
self-insures and doesn't qualify
for a subsidy,
so my insurance premiums are
very high, bordering
on the unaffordable.
I have actually tracked my
insurance even
in the years before the
Affordable Care Act,
and they were rising gradually,
but after
2014, they were spiking
dramatically.
I started with a $548 premium.
So I changed the plan, went down
to a $411
premium with a higher
deductible.
And then next year, I don't know
what it will
be.
I can't change it again, because
this is the
least expensive plan.
I don't know what can be done
because it's
such a complex issue.
At this point, you have to
depend on the government
to iron it out.
So, hopefully, that's what they
will do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mary Agnes, how
typical is
she?
MARY AGNES CAREY: Well, we're
hearing more
and more from these people who
don't qualify
for a subsidy.
It's roughly in the ballpark of
five to seven
million people who are buying on
the individual
market or in the exchanges.
They don't qualify for a
subsidy.
And it's really difficult,
because while many
people, something like 85
percent, of individuals
on the exchange can get that
subsidy that
can help lower the premium,
there are folks
that don't have that.
And I received an e-mail this
week from a
small business person who said
he felt like
he had absolutely no hope for
the Affordable
Care Act for him to be able to
afford the
premiums.
And, of course, we have this
requirement for
coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Reid, we
just heard her
say, she said, I wish -- she
says it's now
up to the federal government to
fix it.
But what's the likelihood that
that can happen?
REID WILSON: Well, the question
really depends
on what happens in November, two
weeks from
now, on Election Day.
If Hillary Clinton wins the
presidency, Democrats
win the Senate, and Democrats
win the House,
well, there's a real good shot
that the Democrats
will do something to repair the
Affordable
Care Act on a wholesale basis.
But taking back the House is a
really steep
hurdle for Democrats, and we
have seen Republicans
in control of the House vote to
repeal the
Affordable Care Act 50-plus
times.
This is -- the Republicans in
the House have
been unwilling to even make
technical corrections
to the bill.
So, unless there is some massive
sea change
within the Republican Party,
which I don't
see happening, it's going to be
very difficult
for even the smallest
corrections to be made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we also
talked to a single
mother with two children in
Greensboro, North
Carolina.
This is one of the states where
so many insurers
have pulled out.
NATALIE CUNNINGHAM, North
Carolina: My name
is Natalie Cunningham.
I'm 30 years old.
And I live in Greensboro, North
Carolina.
I have Coventry health
insurance, where I
pay just $9 a month.
And the subsidy on it is $237.
I recently found out that my
insurer, Coventry,
was not going to be part of the
marketplace,
Obamacare, anymore.
And so now I'm at the point of,
you know,
OK, now I'm going to be
switching to Blue
Cross/Blue Shield, but whether I
will be able
to afford it, because I don't
know how much
the plans are going to go up,
and they had
already just about doubled at
the end of 2015.
Just going by what I can handle,
because when
you want to pick between buying
school shoes
or, you know, paying extra money
into the
health insurance plan, as a
mother, sometimes,
you have got to make those
decisions and cut
out the health insurance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mary Agnes, why
are so many
insurers pulling out?
MARY AGNES CAREY: Well,
sometimes, they just
didn't make the money that they
wanted to
make or they have had a hard
time managing
the sicker folks who have come
in initially,
and trying balance out the risk
pool.
But what's really interesting I
think about
this example is that it
illustrates states
where insurers are leaving the
market causing
some problems.
She's from North Carolina.
In about -- about 230,000 people
in North
Carolina are going to have a
change with their
plan because two or three
insurers are dropping
out.
Alabama and South Carolina,
there's one insurer
statewide.
But one word of encouragement,
if I could
offer, is that her subsidy is
going to increase
as the plans increase in price.
You mentioned this in your
introduction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARY AGNES CAREY: For that
benchmark plan,
that will also increase.
So, she may find it not as
unmanageable as
she thinks.
And, of course, for all of these
consumers,
getting on healthcare.gov, or
your state-based
exchange to shop, you might be
able to go
to a plan in that same category,
whether it's
a silver or a bronze or gold or
a platinum,
and you might find something at
a lower price
that still works for you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's just
going to take
some time for them to figure it
out.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally,
let's hear -- this
is a young woman who lives in
Brooklyn.
She happens to be healthy.
She's looking for an affordable
policy.
LAURA BRICKMAN, New York: I'm
Laura Brickman.
I'm a 27-year-old who lives in
Brooklyn, New
York.
I'm working as a freelance
journalist doing
video and print work.
But, because it's freelance, I
don't have
an insurance plan through my
employer.
So, I'm currently uninsured.
To me to buy a plan is a little
bit frustrating,
because I feel that I don't use
it personally,
and the amount of money I would
be spending
on insurance is things that I
could divert
to non-health care issues,
because I honestly
don't have many health care
expenses.
And so the chances of me really
taking advantage
of the plan are very low, I
think.
I don't have any chronic health
issues.
The only thing I would use
medical care for
at this point is like a major
medical emergency,
which has not happened,
fortunately.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mary Agnes,
this reminds
us these tough choices for young
people like
her who know they do have to pay
a fine if
they're not in the system.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Right.
That's really important to
remember.
For next year, it's $695, or 2.5
percent of
income, whichever is greater.
And you have got to remember,
even if you
think, I can afford to pay that,
you still
don't have health insurance, and
you're going
to be on the hook if something
happens to
you.
So there are some things that
she can consider.
There's a catastrophic plan for
people under
30.
There are some other options.
Again, you should really go to
the marketplace
and check it out to see if
something works.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Reid, just
finally, before
we wrap this up, talk about what
it is that
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump
have said
they want to do to either fix or
adjust the
Affordable Care Act.
REID WILSON: Well, neither have
offered a
lot of specifics on the matter.
Donald Trump has talked about
allowing insurance
plans to be purchased across
state lines,
which has been a staple of the
Republican
policy for quite a long time.
Hillary Clinton, on the other
hand, has talked
about the positive aspects of
the Affordable
Care Act, being able to stay on
your parents'
insurance plan until you're 26,
some of the
other positives that are broadly
favorable,
broadly popular across the
country.
But what's clear is that the
next president
is going to have to deal with
some kind of
fix for the Affordable Care Act.
The question is what will they
be able to
get through what is likely to be
a divided
Congress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the idea of
unwinding it
completely, which is what Donald
Trump talks
about, how practical?
REID WILSON: That -- just like
Republicans
going along with changes to the
Affordable
Care Act is unlikely for a
Democratic president,
unwinding the Affordable Care
Act is going
to be very unlikely for a
Republican president,
whether it Donald Trump or
whoever comes next,
because there is a significant
Democratic
presence in the Senate, and
they're able to
block that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, this is a
subject we
have been talking about from the
beginning
of this campaign until right
down to the end.
Reid Wilson, Mary Agnes Carey,
thank you both.
MARY AGNES CAREY: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president of
the United
States is often called the
leader of the free
world.
And with just two weeks left in
the campaign,
it can be relatively safely said
that many
eyes overseas are keeping close
tabs on the
race for the White House.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant has
been sampling opinion on his
recent travels
through Europe, and he sent us
what he found.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
She's playing chicken.
Look, Putin...
CHRIS WALLACE, Moderator: Wait,
but...
DONALD TRUMP: ... from
everything I see, has
no respect for this person.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, that's because he'd rather
have a puppet
as president of the United
States.
DONALD TRUMP: No puppet.
No puppet.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And it's
pretty clear...
DONALD TRUMP: You're the puppet.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: It's
pretty clear...
MALCOLM BRABANT: There's little
doubt that
the world is watching the battle
between Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump with a
combination
of fascination and trepidation.
In Greece, the land that
invented democracy,
hostility towards Germany has
replaced anti-Americanism
during the financial crisis.
But in a nation that is Europe's
frontier
with the Islamic world, leading
foreign analyst
Thanos Dokos is concerned about
the possibility
of a Trump presidency.
THANOS DOKOS, Foreign Analyst:
He will most
likely be an isolationist
president, which
is never good news for the rest
of the world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: American-led
invasions of
Afghanistan and Iraq divided
Europe.
But one of George W. Bush's
staunchest allies
in the coalition of the willing
was Danish
Prime Minister Anders Fogh
Rasmussen.
He went on to become the NATO
secretary-general.
And he's dismissive of this
November's Republican
candidate.
ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN, Former
NATO Secretary-General:
The American electorate have a
choice between
two very different candidates,
one who made
a clear statement that he
doesn't want the
U.S. to be the world's
policeman, and another
candidate who I know from four
years of cooperation
when she was secretary of state
who has the
will to lead the world.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What do you
think of her
as a potential leader?
ANDERS FOGH RASMUSSEN: Well,
seen from a foreign
policy perspective, I have full
confidence
that she will be engaged, she
will take the
lead.
And that's necessary, because we
know from
experience that, if the United
States retreats,
or is perceived to retreat, it
will leave
behind a vacuum, and that vacuum
will be filled
by the bad guys.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At the
supposedly neutral
United Nations in Geneva, the
High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad
Al-Hussein, has
waded in with his take on the
presidential
contest.
ZEID BIN RA'AD ZEID AL-HUSSEIN,
United Nations
High Commissioner for Human
Rights: If Donald
Trump is elected, on the basis
of what he
has said already, and unless
that changes,
I think it's, without any doubt,
that he would
be dangerous, from an
international point
of view.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Russia's
relations with the
United States have descended
towards Cold
War levels as a result of its
aggression in
Ukraine and devastating attacks
in Syria on
behalf of President Assad, not
to mention
American claims that Russia
hacked the Democratic
Party's computer system and
accusations that
Moscow is interfering in the
election.
Donald Trump has said he could
do business
with Vladimir Putin, who was
making conciliatory
noises during this appearance.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): The American people
will make
the choice they consider
necessary.
No matter what the result is, we
will work
with any leader of the United
States, whoever
this president is, if, of
course, the new
U.S. leader wishes to work with
our country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Putin said
he was troubled
by American reaction to
allegations that Russia
hacked Democratic Party e-mails.
VLADIMIR PUTIN (through
translator): About
a decade ago, they wouldn't
mention Russia
at all.
They would say it wasn't even
worth talking
about Russia, because it is such
a third-rate
regional power and not
interesting at all.
Now Russia is problem number one
in the entire
election campaign.
All they do is keep talking
about us.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Trump does
have vocal
European supporters, like Morten
Uhrskov.
Uhrskov heads Danish Unity, one
of several
new right-wing parties fighting
for voters'
support.
He dislikes Trump's character,
but supports
his policies, despite the
tycoon's lack of
foreign affairs experience.
MORTEN UHRSKOV JENSEN, Leader,
Danish Unity:
He has said things there I don't
follow, like
putting in doubt whether the
Baltic countries
should be defended.
Of course they should,
naturally.
I'm a European.
I'm concerned about Russia's
foreign policy,
actually.
So, yes, he has been incoherent,
but bottom
line is stop endless wars and
use more on
defense.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But isn't the
key, though,
to being the commander in chief
the fact that
you have got a character that is
worthy of
that position?
And many people would say that
he doesn't
actually have the character.
You don't like his character, so
how can you
support him when he's supposed
to be the leader
of the free world?
MORTEN UHRSKOV JENSEN: How could
I support
anyone other than Trump?
I could not support Clinton, who
wants to
continue endless wars, as I
said.
And may I remind, he -- you have
Congress,
you have the Supreme Court, you
have the best
advisers in the whole wide
world.
Yes, I know he's inexperienced
in foreign
policy, but he will not be a
dictator.
It's ridiculous when I hear
people say he
can press the nuclear button,
things like
that.
It's ridiculous.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Britain four
months ago,
as Brexit supporters celebrated
an unexpected
victory.
Trump's backers will be hoping
that the U.S.
will deliver a similar surprise
result.
NIGEL FARAGE, Former U.K.
Independence Party
Leader: If I was an American
citizen, I wouldn't
vote for Hillary Clinton if you
paid me.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MALCOLM BRABANT: The most
influential foreign
right-winger in Trump's camp is
Nigel Farage,
former head of the U.K.
Independence Party,
UKIP, who convinced British
voters to leave
the European Union.
NIGEL FARAGE: I think that you
have a fantastic
opportunity here with this
campaign.
You can go out, you can beat the
pollsters,
you can beat the commentators,
you can beat
Washington.
And you will do it by doing what
we did for
Brexit in Britain.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MALCOLM BRABANT: Greece is
currently having
a taste of an aggressive
right-wing party.
It's called Golden Dawn.
Here, one of its lawmakers
lashed out at parliamentary
opponent Liana Kanelli.
Chain-smoking Kanelli has a
reputation as
one of Greece's more colorful
politicians,
and she despairs of what America
is becoming.
LIANA KANELLI, Greek
Parliamentarian: I mean,
what the hell is the personality
of someone
voting for him?
And on the other hand, I think
there must
be a lot of men like Clinton in
the states,
that they would like to have a
lady in their
life like Hillary.
She can absorb any marital or
other problem.
MALCOLM BRABANT: There's a hoary
old expression
that, when America sneezes,
people on this
side of the Atlantic catch a
cold.
Many Europeans believe that the
world was
made a more dangerous place
after George W.
Bush's military campaigns in
Afghanistan and
Iraq.
Certainly, the current refugee
crisis is seen
as a partial legacy of those
wars, because
of the large numbers of Iraqis
and Afghans
seeking asylum alongside
Syrians.
Regardless of history's judgment
of Barack
Obama's presidency, there's a
popular view
that his administration has done
much to improve
America's international
reputation.
But the coming election has
generated levels
of apprehension not experienced
for decades.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Copenhagen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You will probably
be surprised
to hear that hunger and
homelessness is a
JUDY WOODRUFF: You will probably
be surprised
to hear that hunger and
homelessness is a
growing problem for thousands of
college students
across the country, particularly
among those
who are the first in their
families to pursue
a degree.
This is forcing some
universities to figure
out new ways of keeping
low-income students
in school.
Jeffrey Brown has the story from
the University
of California, Berkeley, as part
of our weekly
education series Making the
Grade.
ANTHONY CARRASCO, College
Student: Oh, darn.
These tortillas are not very
good.
JEFFREY BROWN: Every Sunday
night, Anthony
Carrasco prepares the food he
will eat for
the week ahead, setting himself
a quota of
one meal a day.
ANTHONY CARRASCO: I can skip
breakfast, skip
lunch, and even skip dinner.
And I have just saved myself
close to $30
or $40.
I, like many folks, come to
college to get
out of poverty.
I really thought that was the
end of the line
when we got the admission
letter.
Unfortunately, it wasn't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Anthony is a
junior at the
University of California,
Berkeley, one of
the nation's leading public
universities.
And he's the first in his family
to attend
college.
It was hard to get in, and now
hard to stay
in, but maybe not for a reason
many people
have considered.
ANTHONY CARRASCO: We were
expecting long nights
in the libraries and tough
exams, but what
we're really facing is, you
know, just, you
know, sleepless nights worried
about rent
and really distracting lecture
halls, when
you just cannot stop thinking
about food.
JEFFREY BROWN: Today, almost a
third of all
students entering two- and
four-year colleges
are first-generation.
They're more likely to be
minorities and come
from low-income families.
And by the estimate of one
advocacy group,
more than half of them lack
reliable access
to food.
And that contributes to their
lower graduation
rates.
Many years ago, I myself was a
student here
at Berkeley.
I was fortunate enough to have
the means so
I could concentrate on my
studies, my grades,
and, yes, the fun side of
college life.
But more and more these days,
many students
find they have to worry about
more basic needs,
including food and shelter.
A beautiful campus, world-class
academics
and now a new reality.
WOMAN: Is there any stock on
Friday?
MAN: We're going to restock on
Friday, so
everything is going to be here
on Friday.
JEFFREY BROWN: A campus food
pantry, where
twice a month students can stock
up on staples.
The University of California
system has worked
hard to bring in
first-generation, low-income
and what are called
nontraditional students,
such as veterans and those with
families.
But more work is required to
help these students
survive and graduate.
RUBEN CANEDO, University of
California, Berkeley:
Twenty-five bags today.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ruben Canedo is a
first-generation
graduate from Berkeley.
He's now a leading advocate for
student food
security, and oversees the
campus food pantry.
RUBEN CANEDO: What we're doing
on our campus
is making sure that campus
becomes basic need
secure.
You have the recession, you have
the increasing
cost of living, and students are
caught in
the middle of that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you see
students falling
through the cracks, I mean,
having to leave
school?
RUBEN CANEDO: Absolutely.
We definitely have students that
said, you
know what, at this moment, I
can't do this.
And they left.
And it wasn't because of their
academic challenges.
It was because of the living
cost of the area.
They were saying, I can't afford
my rent and
I can't afford to eat.
Therefore, I can't stay here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Berkeley, sitting
in the midst
of the notoriously expensive San
Francisco
Bay area, is among the most
costly college
towns in the country.
Financial aid can cover tuition
and books,
but, sometimes, it's not enough
for rent or
food.
And for some students, there are
barriers
beyond money.
TEJAE DUNNIVANT, College
Student: When you
get here, you're also coming
into a higher
level of academia that
especially sometimes
more nontraditional students are
not used
to.
JEFFREY BROWN: TeJae Dunnivant
is another
first-generation student and a
mother of five.
After serving in the Army
Reserve, she decided
to earn a degree.
But she's struggled to catch up
to her classmates.
TEJAE DUNNIVANT: You're reading
all new material
that you're not familiar at all
with.
And so it takes a lot to be able
to, you know,
get that in.
JEFFREY BROWN: Have you had
times where you
think you couldn't get by, you
might have
to drop out of school?
TEJAE DUNNIVANT: Yes.
When I don't understand exactly
where to go
to get the help, there are times
like that.
But now that I'm in my third
year, I know
where to go to get the help.
JEFFREY BROWN: TeJae regularly
meets advisers
at Berkeley's Educational
Opportunities Program,
a campus resource for
disadvantaged students.
YUKI BURTON, University of
California, Berkeley:
What's going on?
How's the beginning of the
semester been so
far?
TEJAE DUNNIVANT: It hasn't been
bad.
I feel like I'm doing better at
keeping up
JEFFREY BROWN: Yuki Burton is
another Berkeley
graduate who now works to help
those who followed.
YUKI BURTON: I have students who
are living
day by day, again, in that
surviving model
and thinking about, how do I
meet tomorrow's
need and tomorrow's, and not
thinking about
my long-term wellness.
Actually, just earlier this
morning, a student
who told me they are skipping
meals, and they
didn't realize that they'd been
skipping meals
until they verbalized it with me
in a session.
JEFFREY BROWN: Having talked to
so many students
and worked with them, what
separates those
who make it from those who
don't?
YUKI BURTON: Community and
support.
I think, to some folks, that
sounds very trivial,
right, like it's not a concrete
resource.
But it's really having a group
of peers, of
staff, of faculty who understand
my story
and who get it, that they don't
have to overexplain
themselves.
TAYLOR HARVEY, College Student:
The person
that's experiencing these things
might be
sitting next to you in class,
and you might
not even realize.
JEFFREY BROWN: In her art class
recently,
Taylor Harvey told fellow
students about her
own plight.
Taylor has worked since age 13
and spent parts
of her youth in homeless
shelters.
She's experienced tough times in
college as
well.
TAYLOR HARVEY: I would stay in a
homeless
shelter, but it's pretty unsafe
for a young
woman to stay in a homeless
shelter.
There are a number of students
who sleep in
their cars, because it's
cheaper, or sleep
in university buildings,
libraries, places
that close at night, because
it's safer that
way.
JEFFREY BROWN: Taylor shares an
apartment,
for now, until school closes for
holiday breaks
or her financial aid is spent.
And she's now trying to raise
awareness on
campus of the homeless problem.
TAYLOR HARVEY: We admit that we
don't know
what the solution will be.
But we know what our endgame is,
and that's
to eliminate student
homelessness, and to
help first-generation college
students stay
in college and graduate.
JEFFREY BROWN: This summer, the
University
of California system approved a
new $3.3 million
fund to help students access
food on and off
campus.
The difficult situations many
students find
themselves in have forced
Berkeley and other
institutions to re-ask some
basic questions.
FABRIZIO MEJIA, University of
California,
Berkeley: If we are a public
institution,
what does it mean to educate the
public?
What does it mean to educate
Californians?
And what does it mean that
education is an
engine for social change?
JEFFREY BROWN: Fabrizio Mejia is
the assistant
vice chancellor for student
equity and success
at Berkeley.
FABRIZIO MEJIA: What it means
for our institution,
in particular, and the U.C.
system is that
we have to invest in the
programs that are
going to welcome the students
in, that are
going to get them through, that
are going
to get them to succeed at the
level that we
say is required for everybody
across the board.
JEFFREY BROWN: As more
first-generation students
pursue degrees, colleges and
universities
will have to address the
challenges these
students bring with them.
From Berkeley, California, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yesterday,
Charlotte television
reporter Steve Crump accepted an
apology from
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yesterday,
Charlotte television
reporter Steve Crump accepted an
apology from
Brian Eybers.
The two men were involved in a
confrontation
last week during which Eybers
used the N-word.
And Crump recorded it.
Crump was on assignment in
Charleston, South
Carolina, reporting on hurricane
recovery
when he walked past Eybers.
And a warning: The next two
videos include
use of the N-word.
STEVE CRUMP, WBTV: What did you
call me?
BRIAN EYBERS, South Carolina:
What?
STEVE CRUMP: What did you just
call me?
BRIAN EYBERS: I called you sir.
STEVE CRUMP: No, you didn't call
me sir.
You called me the N-word, right?
BRIAN EYBERS: I did.
I believe I did call you the
N-word.
You're a (EXPLETIVE DELETED)
idiot.
You're ignorant.
So, you really are a nigger,
then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the N-word
is one of
the most contentious words in
the English
language.
Special correspondent Charlayne
Hunter-Gault
its origins and use with Harvard
Law School
Professor Randall Kennedy as
part of our year-long
Race Matters Solutions series.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Professor Kennedy,
thank you for joining us.
RANDALL KENNEDY, Professor,
Harvard Law School:
Thank you.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: I don't
have to tell
you we are dealing with a very
contentious
word, but it wasn't always that
way.
So, take us back when it was
more benign.
RANDALL KENNEDY: It's like many
words.
It has a mysterious -- it sort
of rises from
the midst.
So, for instance, in 1619, when
there are
reports about the first blacks
brought to
British North America, they are
referred to
as N-I-G-G-U-H-S.
Well, it doesn't seem that that
was meant
in a derogatory way.
It seems merely descriptive.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: When did
it become
the kind of word that is so
controversial
today?
RANDALL KENNEDY: Go back and
take a look at
what some black writers were
saying in the
1820s, the 1830s.
They make mention of how some
white people
would tell their children, if
you don't behave,
we're going to put you in the
nigger seat.
If you don't behave, we are
going to make
you sit with the niggers.
That's why we know that, by
then, the word
had become a slur.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, why
are people,
like, you know, a very
successful, popular
comedian like Larry Wilmore, who
addressed
the president with the word at
the White House
Correspondents Dinner.
LARRY WILMORE, Comedian: So Mr.
President,
I'm going the keep it 100.
Yo, Barry, you did it, my
nigger.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But also
a lot of
the rappers and people, what
don't they know?
They are using it as almost a
term of endearment.
RANDALL KENNEDY: The infamy of
nigger is -- it's
a word that has been used to
terrorize people,
to put people down.
But it has also been used in
other ways.
It's also been used as a way of
putting a
mirror up to racism.
So, Dick Gregory titled his
memoir "Nigger:
An Autobiography."
Richard Pryor had a number of
albums, "That
Nigger's Crazy," "Bicentennial
Nigger."
Is he using nigger to put black
people down?
No, he's using it ironically.
He's sometimes using it
playfully.
He's using it often as a mirror
to shame racism.
RICHARD PRYOR, Comedian: And I
don't want
them hip white people coming up
to me and
calling me no nigger or telling
me nigger
jokes.
I don't like it.
RANDALL KENNEDY: Then you have
got people
who have the idea of taking
nigger back.
So, you have some people who
say, well, nigger
has been used to take us down.
What we are going to do is grab
this word
and we are going to use it for
our own purposes.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But do
they know the
history of it?
RANDALL KENNEDY: Well, one of
the reasons
I wrote a book about this was
because I got
the sense that there were
especially young
people who were using the word
who didn't
have an understanding of the
history behind
the word.
So, I spent 40 pages just giving
instance
after instance after instance of
the way in
which this word has been used to
hurt black
people.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Hasn't
it also been
used against other ethnic
groups, Chinese,
Mormons, Jews?
RANDALL KENNEDY: It's the atomic
bomb of racial
slurs.
It is the racial slur that has
been used in
other contexts, so, for
instance, Palestinians,
the niggers of the Middle East,
the Irish,
the niggers of Europe.
This is a term that has been
generalized around
the world.
If you want to put somebody
down, analogize
them to the nigger.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Given
the power of
this particular word that we are
discussing,
the power of it to wound, what
is the solution
to that?
RANDALL KENNEDY: I don't think
there is a
solution, other than education.
People ought to know that even
if you are
using the word without
malevolence, even if
you are attempting to use the
word in an ironic
way or as a term of endearment,
there's always
the problem of mistake.
So, I have gotten hundreds of
e-mails over
the years from white kids who
say the following:
I'm running around with my black
friends,
and we are listening to rap.
Is it OK if I say nigger because
we are shouting
the lyrics of these rap songs?
And I say to people often that
it may very
well be that you're with your
friend.
It may very well be that you
have no bad intentions.
But if you are out in public,
and especially
if you are white, and you use
this word, there
is the problem of the person
who's right next
to you who doesn't know you at
all, who doesn't
know what your intentions are,
who doesn't
know about your friendship with
your black
buddy over here.
But as soon as the word nigger
comes out of
your mouth, this person slaps
you, or worse.
Simple prudence would dictate
that you use
this term very carefully, if
ever.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Some of
these younger
people using it are not using
the full word.
They are abbreviating it.
RANDALL KENNEDY: There are some
people who
make a big distinction between
nigga, which
they say is OK, and nigger.
Now, in my view, it's important
to know about
that distinction, because some
people put
a lot of weight on it.
I don't.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, how
should people
who find it so offensive and who
understand
the hurt associated with it
respond?
RANDALL KENNEDY: What people
should do is
explain to their friends, to
their neighbors
how they feel when they confront
the word
nigger and why they feel the way
they feel.
So, a number of years ago, I was
in a book
store talking about my book
"Nigger."
And a man said to me: Professor,
I have heard
all that you have to say and,
you know, your
-- all of your analysis about
why it is that
sometimes nigger should be
tolerated.
I have heard it, but I'm going
tell you something.
When I hear the word nigger, I
remember when
that word was used by people who
wouldn't
allow me to vote and who put me
at the back
of the bus.
And when I hear that word,
that's what I think
about.
That was very powerful.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Absolutely.
RANDALL KENNEDY: That was very
powerful.
And what I said to him was: Sir,
I understand.
I understand why you do not want
to hear this
word.
And I think that people are
going to have
to talk with one another and
share these stories
and share these feelings.
And I think that that's the only
way in which
we are going to come to a
higher, a deeper
understanding of why people have
the feelings
they have with respect to this,
the infamous
N-word.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Well,
Professor Randall
Kennedy, I'm sure you're going
to get some
reactions to this, but thank you
for joining
us and being as honest as you
have been.
RANDALL KENNEDY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last week, we
aired a report
about new and old technologies
being used
to help clean up water runoff in
the nation's
heartland.
Tonight, a second report about
water and the
tensions between rural
agriculture and urban
areas over keeping it clean.
From Detroit Public Television,
David Biello
reports, as part of the
documentary "The Ethanol
Effect."
DAVID BIELLO, Detroit Public
Television: In
Des Moines, Iowa, Adam Mason is
preparing
dinner, washing vegetables with
tap water.
ADAM MASON, Iowa: For a lot of
folks, it's
easy just to turn on the tap and
trust that
you have clean water.
There's nearly a half-million
Iowans who are
drinking water and who are
vulnerable.
DAVID BIELLO: Part of the cause
of Adam's
concern can be found 150 miles
away from Des
Moines in Storm Lake, Iowa.
Storm Lake is located in Buena
Vista County,
home to some of the richest
farmland in the
country.
Corn is king here, grown mostly
for animal
feed and ethanol.
Corn doesn't like to have its
feet wet, and
to keep the fields dry, pipes
have been installed
to drain water off the fields.
And with that water goes the
fertilizer, fertilizer
laden with nitrate.
BILL STOWE, CEO, Des Moines
Water Works: We
have eight units here
constructed in about
1990-1992, before they became
operational.
DAVID BIELLO: Bill Stowe is the
chief executive
officer of the Des Moines Water
Works.
BILL STOWE: The big challenge
cleaning up
the water in the Raccoon and Des
Moines Rivers,
the rivers that we take from,
they're surface
waters going through 10,000
square miles of
industrial agriculture upstream,
is the effects
of that industrial agriculture
on water quality.
We're seeing water that's so
dirty, that we
have to build facilities like
this, which
arguably is the world's largest
nitrate-removal
facility, to be able to clean up
the water
to deliver it safely to our
customers here
in Central Iowa.
DAVID BIELLO: Nitrate is a
dangerous chemical
in drinking water; it stops
oxygen from entering
the human bloodstream.
The nitrate-removal facility is
at capacity
and aging, and it may soon be
overwhelmed.
The Des Moines Water Works wants
to have the
fertilizer runoff regulated as
pollution under
the federal Clean Water Act, and
has filed
a lawsuit against three rural
Iowa counties,
claiming that the nitrate
they're removing
is a result of runoff from
fields upstream.
DALE ARENDS, Board of
Supervisors, Buena Vista
County: This is not Iowa nice.
DAVID BIELLO: Dale Arends is a
member of the
Board of Supervisors in Buena
Vista County.
He's named in the lawsuit.
DALE ARENDS: This would change
agriculture
if Des Moines Water Works gets
what they want.
If they were able to come out
here and tell
us how much water we could
remove from our
soils to make them farmable, you
would turn
Central Iowa back into a swamp,
which is what
it was 150 years ago.
DAVID BIELLO: For the lawsuit to
be successful,
a court must first decide if the
fertilizer-rich
water running off the fields
comes from under
the ground.
If a court decides it is
groundwater, then
Bill Stowe and the Des Moines
Water Works
have a valid case.
If a court decides the runoff is
storm water
running off the surface of the
fields, then
Des Moines Water Works has no
case.
Doug Gross is the legal counsel
for the Agribusiness
Association of Iowa.
DOUG GROSS, Legal Counsel,
Agribusiness Association
of Iowa: This is like a prairie
fire in Iowa,
in that we haven't seen anything
like this
for a long time, where one
component of the
state is really directly
challenging the most
important industry in our state,
and has been
since the founding of the state
of Iowa, which
is agriculture.
DAVID BIELLO: Around the
country, environmental
activists are watching the
lawsuit, and big
ag has raised a lot of money to
help the counties
fight it.
That's because Iowa isn't the
only state feeling
the effects of agricultural
pollution.
In the Great Lakes, excess
fertilizer spills
into Lake Erie near Toledo,
where charter
boat captain Paul Pacholski
makes a living.
PAUL PACHOLSKI, Charter Boat
Captain: Within
24 hours of the water coming out
a drain tile
of a farm, it can be at the
mouth of the Lake
Erie.
It's called the nutrient
superhighway.
DAVID BIELLO: Great for algae.
PAUL PACHOLSKI: Great for algae.
DAVID BIELLO: That algae is
toxic.
It thrives on the fertilizer
running off the
farm fields.
In 2014, a massive algal bloom
shut down the
city of Toledo's water supply
for three days.
It's also bad for Paul's
business.
PAUL PACHOLSKI: Do you want to
go to an area
that you have got to worry about
your health
afterwards, or do you want to go
to an area
that is pristine and beautiful
with the good
clear water?
DAVID BIELLO: Some Great Lakes
states have
begun to take steps to control
fertilizer
runoff, and Iowa has a voluntary
program in
place, called the Iowa Nutrient
Reduction
Strategy.
Bill Northey is Iowa's secretary
of agriculture.
BILL NORTHEY, Iowa Secretary of
Agriculture:
Our nutrient reduction strategy
started four
years ago.
The lawsuit started a year ago.
So we were in process of
engaging folks.
DAVID BIELLO: So, would you
encourage Des
Moines Water Works to just drop
the suit?
BILL NORTHEY: I would be very
glad if the
suit went away.
I think it's a big distraction.
I think it's expensive.
I think that money could be
better spent on
engaging producers and engaging
urban areas
on water quality.
BILL STOWE: It's the ag folks
that really
are driving this problem.
And, in this state, we regulate,
and some
would argue over-regulate,
cities and towns.
But we leave unregulated
industrial agriculture.
And, of course, agriculture is
the king of
the block.
Therefore, leave it alone, and
hopefully a
voluntary system will bring in
conservation
practices that will improve
water quality.
We say, no pun intended, hogwash
to that,
hasn't worked, won't work.
DALE ARENDS: They have forced
themselves to
spend over
three-quarters-of-a-million
dollars.
They have forced us to spend
over a million
dollars, and nothing has really
changed.
DAVID BIELLO: Dale Arends isn't
the only one
raising his voice.
NARRATOR: Bill Stowe forced a
double-digit
increase in water fees, while he
is set to
receive a $500,000 bonus.
DAVID BIELLO: A group called the
Iowa Partnership
for Clean Water is fighting the
lawsuit like
a political campaign.
It's running anti-Stowe TV ads.
The lawsuit could be tied up in
court for
years, maybe even a decade.
That leaves the fate of Adam
Mason and other
customers of the Des Moines
Water Works up
in the air.
ADAM MASON: It's no longer
whether or not
we have a water crisis.
Everyone acknowledges we're in a
water crisis
now.
The question is, how do we fix
it and who's
going to pay?
DAVID BIELLO: For the "PBS
NewsHour, I'm David
Biello in Des Moines, Iowa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to learn
about technologies
farmers in the Nebraska and Iowa
are using
to reduce agricultural
contaminants in water,
visit PBS.org/NewsHour.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, revisit
a 2012 conversation between our
own Margaret
Warner and former Supreme Court
Justice David
Souter, where they discussed
what he then
saw as the greatest threat to
the republic.
Here's an excerpt:
DAVID SOUTER, Former Supreme
Court Justice:
What I worry about is that, when
problems
are not addressed, people will
not know who
is responsible.
And when the problems get bad
enough, as they
might do, for example, with
another serious
terrorist attack, as they might
do with another
financial meltdown, some one
person will come
forward and say, give me total
power and I
will solve this problem.
That is how the Roman republic
fell.
Augustus became emperor not
because he arrested
the Roman Senate.
He became emperor because he
promised that
he would solve problems that
were not being
solved.
If we know who is responsible, I
have enough
faith in the American people to
demand performance
from those responsible.
If we don't know, we will stay
away from the
polls.
We will not demand it, and the
day will come
when somebody will come forward,
and we and
the government will, in effect,
say, take
the ball and run with it.
Do what you have to do.
That is the way democracy dies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
Margaret's entire
conversation with Justice Souter
on our Web
site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, we will bring you
the latest
in the race for the White House.
Plus, our Leading Edge series
explores political
bots, how computer programs are
helping shape
the conversation around the
election on Twitter.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us
at
the "PBS NewsHour," thank you,
and good night.